# Cisco notes on the networking basics course

## Cisco Packet Tracer
A packet trace is a tool which allows you to simulate a real network. It allows you to 
- Add virtual devices and connect them via cables/wireless
- Select, delete, inspect, label and group components within your network, kind of like mapping out all the devices in your home
- Manage your network

Network management menu lets you: 
- Open an existing/sample network
- Save your current network
- Modify your user profile

## Communication in a connected world

- Networks installed in small offices or home offices are referred to as SOHO networks.

### Data Transmission
**The Bit**
Computers and networks only work with binary digits. That's a strong of 0 and 1. Every bit of data on these devices, are transmitted as a series of bits. Each bit has 1 of 2 possible bits, 0, or 1. 
Bit is actually an abbreviation of Binary Digit. 

A bit is stored and transmitted as one of two possible discrete states. This can include two directions of magnetisation, two distinct voltage or current levels, two distinct levels of light intensity or any other physcial system of two discrete states. I.e. light switches can be on or off; binary would dictate this as 0 or 1.

Computers use binary codes to represent and interpret letters, numbers and characters with bits. A common system is ASCII or American Standard Code for Information Interchange..

ASCII represents each character with 8 bits. I.e. 
- Capital Letter: A = 01000001 
- Number: 9 = 00111001
- Special Character: # = 00100011

Each group of 8 bits is known as a **byte**

Codes can be used to represent almost any type of info. I.e. Computer data, graphics, photos, voice, video and music. Bytes are life for a computer

Once the data is transformed into bits, it has to be converted into signals that can be sent across the network media to where it needs to be. Media in this case, referring to the physical medium on which signals are transmitted. I.e. Copper wire, fiber-optic, electromagnetic waves through air. 
A signal consists of electrocal or optical patterns that transmits through connected devices. The patterns represent digital bits, or the data if you will, and travel across the media from source to destination as a series of pulses of electricty, optical (light) or radio waves (wireless signals). 

- Volunteered Data is data that you knowingly share through the networks
- Inferred data is data that's generated by my activities, I.e credit card companies keep a record of the purchases you make, like preferrences. Information that can pin point your location. 
- Observed data is data that's collected and stored through your actions, like location data on your phone that is stored at carrier centres. 

### Bandwidth and Throughput

High bandwith applications like streaming services or multiplayer video games require fast and reliable connections. To support this, networks have to be able to transmit and receive bits at a very fast rate. 

Different physical medias support different speeds and the rate of data transfer is normally discussed in terms of bandwidth and throughput.

Bandwidth is the capacity of a medium to carry data. Digital bandwidth measure the amount of data that can flow from place to place in a given amount of time. Bandwidth is normally measured in bits. I.e.
- Kbps - Thousands
- Mbps - Millions
- Gbps - Billions

Throughput is similar to bandwidth however, due to a number of factors, throughput doesn't normally match the specified bandwidth.
- The amount of data being sent and received.
- The types of data
- The latency created by the number of network devices encountered between sourse / destination.

Latency refers to the amount of time it takes for data to travel from point A -> B

Throughput measurements do not take into account the validity or usefulness of the bits being transmitted and received. Many messages received through the network are not destined for specific user applications. An example would be network control messages that regulate traffic and correct errors.

**In short, Bandiwidth is the theoretical capacity in which data can be carried from source to destination where as Throughput is the measurement of data per second (including any delays). 
When you take an internet speed test, the figures you see are the throughput as this includes delays like latency etc. 
